---
title: "Book: The Psychology of Money"
date: 2025-04-07
tags: post
layout: post-layout.njk
---

The following is a quick recap of the Book by Morgan Housel.

## Nobody’s crazy

Everyone has a different set of experiences which can explain their financial
decisions. Someone poor who spends 600 dollars a year on lottery tickets
doesn’t think it’s unreasonable. Someone growing up in a time when there was no
money to be made from stocks might think it unreasonable to invest in stocks.
Someone who’s never seen bonds make money wont invest in those e en if the
facts change. So don’t be too quick to judge your own or others behavior.

## Luck and risk

If bill gates hadn’t been to lakeside high school which was one of the only
places where a computer was available at the time there wouldn’t have been
Microsoft. His buddy Kent or Keith or something was going strong with the group
of bill and the other guy involved with Microsoft. He died before his 18th
birthday in a mountaineering accident. The chances of dying in the mountains at
that time were vanishingly small. If someone scores some nice gains in the
stock market don’t be too quick to attribute it to his skills. Same goes for
losses. Don’t be too hard on yourself.

## Never enough

Try to keep the goalposts from moving. If you allow lifestyle creep to take
over, your not going to be more happy for it. At some point we set ourselves a
goal and think we’ll be good when we reach that. Don’t fall into the trap of
reaching for ever more. Enough is really enough. Cover your basic needs and
maybe some extra. But do you really need a sports car and a home with more
bedrooms than occupants? Don’t compare yourself to others. I once thought if I
make 50k a year I’m pretty good. Now I make 60 and think I should be going more
toward 75. maybe that’s a mistake. I can afford all I need and then some, so
maybe I can stop worrying and enjoy the good fortune that I have while I have
it.

## Confounding compounding

Play the long game. Warren buffet made like 80 billion of his 82 billion
fortune in the last couple of years of his life. The compounding effect is
something the mind can’t easily handle. If you stay invested the gains over
time will be insane. Make sure to stay in the market and don’t get wiped out.

## Getting wealthy vs staying wealthy

Those two are fundamentally different. Many people got rich over time but not
all stayed rich. Some of the drops are due to greed. Taking every risk just to
get another dollar when one already has more than enough can lead to ruin. When
you‘ve got money it should be relatively straight forward to diversify and be
safe. Don’t let social comparisons drive you to think you need all the stuff
your neighbor or even the people on a different plane of income have. and
there’s always another plane of income.

## Man in the car

When we look at other people’s nice cars we rarely if ever think about the
person in the car. We rather think how it would be if we owned the car.
Everyone wants to be respected, but this respect isn’t granted if we get a nice
car. We should rather strive to be respectable people than to impress with our
posessions.

## Wealth is what you don’t see

There’s a difference between being rich and being wealthy. Someone with a nice
car is rich. He at least has the money which the car is worth. Whether that
money is provided by the bank or not doesn’t matter here. The thing is that the
person might not be rich anymore tomorrow. Someone earning a high yearly salary
is rich. He can afford a lavish lifestyle, car and a nice flat. He can be
considered rich. These are the things other people see. What we can’t see is
the persons savings account, his stocks and other investments. If the big
salary suddenly stops and our high earner hasn’t saved anything up, he goes
from rich to poor very quickly.

Now consider a guy who doesn’t look like he cares to much about his appearance,
drives a beat up car or bicycle and doesn’t throw money around. This person
wouldn’t be considered rich by a bystander. But what the bystander might not
see is that this person could have substantial amounts of assets saved up. He
might not appear rich but could be wealthy.

## Freedom

What sets our previously mentioned rich guy and our unpreposterous humble man
apart is that one has freedom and the other does not. The rich guy might have
lots of stuff but he doesn’t really have options. He can’t stop working for a
year if he feels like it. He can’t sleep well at night if the few investments
he has plummet. Having more money than one needs to live enables us to have
options. We might not even know what we will need those for, but it’s good to
have them. It buffers stress.

## Long tails

Most investments fail. It’s enough if a few outliers drive all the gains of the
portfolio. This small number of performers will offset the losses of the many
failures.

## Save money

See „Freedom“ above. One does not have to have a specific reason for saving.
It’s just good to have some extra in the bank to be prepared for what you
cannot know.

## Surprise!

None of the era defining events in history are what anyone expected. Count on
surprises.

## Room for error

Leave a margin of safety. If everything plummets you want to be able to stay in
the game and still sleep well.

## Nothings free

You’ll pay with sleepless nights for the gains you make in risky endeavours.

## You’ll change

Consider that your needs and values will change in the future. You might be 
cool with living in a 20qm flat right now, but be aware that you are certain to
change. Same goes the other way. Maybe you don't need to stress about having 
to be able to afford your 400m^2 house for the rest of your life.

## You and me

Don’t buy just because it seems like everyone else buys. Same for selling. The
people doing whatever they do might be playing a different game than you. A day
trader is happy if the stock closed higher in the evening than it opened in the
morning. It doesn’t matter whether there is any value behind it. You might be
playing a different game so don’t get pulled into a hype that might be only
real for people playing a very specific game whose rules you don’t know.
