---
title: "Book: Sapiens - a brief history of humankind"
date: 2025-03-07
tags: post
layout: post-layout.njk
---

The following post was written by Gemini based on some notes I took.

## Unraveling Humanity's Story: A Glimpse into "Sapiens"

Yuval Noah Harari's "Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind" is a sweeping,
thought-provoking journey through the history of our species. It's not just a
dry recitation of facts; it's a deep dive into the forces that shaped us, from
our earliest ancestors to our modern, complex societies.

Harari begins by placing Homo sapiens within the broader context of the Homo
genus, reminding us that we weren't always alone. He introduces us to a diverse
cast of human relatives, including Homo erectus, Neanderthals, and Denisovans,
among others. The sheer number of now-extinct human species is a stark reminder
of our relatively recent dominance. Starting with the first Homo species 7
million years ago, the book traces the timeline to the cognitive revolution of
Homo sapiens around 70,000 BC.

A key theme in "Sapiens" is the power of shared myths and beliefs. Harari
argues that our ability to create and believe in "intersubjective realities" –
concepts that exist only in our collective imagination – is what allowed us to
form large, cooperative societies. These shared beliefs, like those surrounding
money, religion, and nations, enable trust and collaboration between strangers.
He considers money as one of the most powerful examples of this, even stronger
than religion, due to its universal exchangeability and storability.

Harari also challenges conventional wisdom about the progression of human
societies. He argues that hunter-gatherers, often romanticized as simple,
primitive people, already possessed complex social structures and belief
systems. The construction of Göbekli Tepe, a monumental site predating
agriculture, serves as compelling evidence of this.

He further argues that the agricultural revolution wasn't the unmitigated
blessing it's often portrayed as. He famously states that wheat domesticated
humans, not the other way around. Contrary to popular belief, modern
hunter-gatherers like those in the Kalahari work fewer hours than many
agricultural societies. The shift to agriculture, while increasing food
production, often led to a decline in quality of life and the insidious creep
of "luxury becoming necessity."

Finally, Harari explores the impact of writing, beginning with partial scripts
used for bureaucratic purposes, then cuneiform, and eventually the preservation
of myths that were formerly orally transmitted. The development of script
revolutionized how information was stored and disseminated, shaping the course
of human history.

"Sapiens" is a great read for anyone seeking a deeper understanding of our past,
present, and future. Harari's accessible writing style and provocative insights
will leave you questioning long-held assumptions and contemplating the very
nature of what it means to be human.
